---
layout: distill
title: Core genes have surprisingly high recombination rates
description: an explainer on the variation of recombination rates across the bacterial pangenome
tag: recombination bacteria
date: 2022-07-24

authors:
  - name: Asher Preska Steinberg
    url: "https://apsteinberg.github.io/"
    affiliations:
      name: Simons Foundation, LSRF, NYU

bibliography: 2022-07-20-coreflex.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Goal
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Background
  - name: What we found
  - name: Why should you care?
  - name: TL;DR version
  - name: Citations
  - name: Footnotes

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.

---

**length:** 6 minute read, **training necessary**: none

## Goal

The goal of this blog post is to provide a quick explainer of [my recent work](https://elifesciences.org/articles/78533) in eLife with the [Kussell group](https://www.kussellgroup.org/) on recombination across the bacterial pangenome. <d-cite key="steinberg2022core"></d-cite> My hope is this is accessible to folks without any training in microbiology or population genetics.

## Background

<b>_What are core genes?_</b>

If you're not a microbiologist, it may surprise you to learn that for each species of bacteria, there are different ["strains"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strain_(biology)) within that species. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, nearly everyone is familiar with "variants", which are more or less equivalent to strains. Strains are microorganisms that are the same species, yet are genetically distinct from one another. For example, the Delta and Omicron variants are two separate strains of SARS-CoV-2. Analogously here, uropathogenic _E. coli_ (responsible for urinary tract infections) and _E. coli_ used in the lab are different strains.<d-footnote>Unless you happen to study uropathogenic <I>E. coli</I> in the lab.</d-footnote>

SARS-CoV-2 variants all have the same sets of genes, but there are substitutions<d-footnote>Often referred to as mutations.</d-footnote> at specific positions along the genome which makes these variants or strains distinct. For other microorganisms (both bacteria and viruses), different strains can actually have different genes. There is a set of crucial genes known as the "core" genome which is found in all strains of a given microbial species. <d-cite key="mcinerney2017prokaryotes"></d-cite> Then there are numerous genes which are found in only some strains known as the "accessory" or "flexible" genome. These two parts of the genome are known collectively as the "pangenome". As we sequence more and more microbial isolates around the planet, we keep discovering new accessory genes.

<div class="row">
 <div class="mx-auto w-50">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/pangenome.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
Schematic from ref. <d-cite key="mcinerney2017prokaryotes"></d-cite>
</div> 

The core genome includes genes with essential functions, such as ["housekeeping" genes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Housekeeping_gene) which are required for maintenance of basic function. In contrast, the roles of many accessory genes are not understood. Some are thought to be adaptations in response to stresses that only show up in certain environments, which is why they're thought to only occur in certain strains of microbes.

<b>_What is recombination?_</b>

In this paper, we specifically mean "homologous recombination", or what has been more recently been referred to as "allele transfer".<d-cite key="arnold2022horizontal"></d-cite> This is a process in which you have highly similar (i.e., homologous) segments of DNA in two strains of microbes, and one strain donates its DNA segment to the other, replacing the segment in the recipient strain with this new piece of DNA. This is distinct from horizontal gene transfer (HGT), which is another form of recombination. In HGT, you still have a DNA segment transferred from a donor to a recipient strain, yet it is inserted into the genome (vs replacing another segment), and the total amount of DNA in the recipient strain changes (see cartoon below). <d-footnote>In HGT, you can also have "deletions", meaning a piece of DNA is lost from the genome.</d-footnote>

<div class="row">
 <div class="mx-auto w-100">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/HGT_v_homologous.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
Schematics depicting horizontal gene transfer (HGT) on the left and homologous recombination on the right. Bottom row (labeled "Transformed") shows the recipient strain after receiving the DNA segment from the "Donor". schematic from ref. <d-cite key="vos2009recombo"></d-cite>
</div>


## What we found

Largely because of the critical functions that many core genes have, the prevailing wisdom has been that core genes experience fewer recombination events (at least in the form of horizontal gene transfers). <d-cite key="daubin2002phylogenomic, lan2001does, lobkovsky2013gene, wolf2016two"></d-cite> However, in the past it's been difficult to actually do a comprehensive, apples-to-apples comparison of rates in core and accessory genes because of two main issues:
1. Virtually all previous methods to infer recombination rates have relied on re-building the phylogeny<d-footnote>You can think of a phylogeny as the entire evolutionary history of that gene.</d-footnote> of each gene. Because accessory genes are rare, it's tough to build phylogenies for them.
2. We previously lacked a computational method which could analyze the massive amounts of available whole genome sequences which exist for bacteria.

The Kussell group had previously developed a method that happened to circumvent these issues.<d-cite key="lin2017correlated, lin2019inferring"></d-cite> In [our recent work](https://elifesciences.org/articles/78533) in eLife we expanded upon this method, and analyzed the core and accessory genomes of >100,000 bacterial strains to come to the following conclusion:

> <b>Core genes often recombine more than accessory genes.</b>

This was a surprise, given how conserved these genes are. One might think that increased recombination in these regions could disrupt their vital functions.

What's driving this behavior is a complex set of many factors. Based on our data, it appears to be in part related to what are called "divergence-based" recombination barriers.<d-cite key="fraser2007recombination"></d-cite> Basically, the more dissimilar two pieces of DNA are in a donor and recipient strain, the less likely they are to recombine. This is the short version. The long version can be found in the Discussion section of our paper.

## Why should you care?

Good question! There are several implications. Here are a couple:
1. These data suggests that "purifying selection", an evolutionary force that acts to purge deleterious mutations, may be acting in concert with recombination to "homogenize" core genes. We think this may be because the functions of these genes are so critical, cells can't afford to have many mutations in this part of the genome.
2. This may require the field to re-think how we build phylogenies for bacterial genomes. Many have been calling for this already.<d-cite key="creevey2004does, sakoparnig2021whole"></d-cite> Core genes are frequently used for this purpose, and our data suggests that we likely need to properly account for recombination even when building phylogenies with core genes.

## TL;DR version

For bacteria, genes which have essential functions often exchange more DNA than genes with non-essential functions.